So whenever you're
building an application,
you're probably gonna be dealing
with some environment variables,
things like API keys and
database credentials.
And these can be added to
a .env file, .env, when you're
developing locally so
that you can know those secrets.
In this exercise, we want to allow
the user to enter the website
if they know the correct passphrase
using an environment variable.
So right now, if they know the passphrase,
which is open sesame,
nothing happens, or
at least nothing good happens.
Because we haven't declared that
environment variable in our .env file, so
we'll do that now.
Create the passphrase, open sesame.
And now, inside our routes/+page.server.js,
we can import that environment variable
from the $env/static/private module.
And this is where they
were getting kicked out
before cuz the data.get(passphrase)
does not equal the hard-coded value.
We'll replace that hard-coded value
with the environment variable.
And now, if you type open
sesame into the input, I'm in.
Now, it's important that when you're
dealing with environment variables,
that you don't accidentally
expose them to the user,
because then they could be stolen,
and that would not be good.
And SvelteKit actively prevents you from
accidentally revealing your secrets.
If you try and import env vars into
your page.svelte component,
Sorry, I lost my scroll place.
If you try and import $env/static/private
into your Svelte component,
then it's gonna break.
All right, we see this error
message from Vite that says,
Cannot import $env/static/private
into client-side code, right?
This is a server-only module, and there's
a few server-only modules in SvelteKit.
Anytime you have a module
that has the .server suffix,
page.server.js, layout.server.js,
+server.js, or
any of your own modules that
have a .server.js suffix.
And also any modules
inside src/lib/server,
these are considered server modules
that cannot be imported into client-side
code under any circumstances.
And so within those files, it's quite
safe to access environment variables and
to communicate directly
with your database.
And in turn, those modules can only
be imported by other server modules.
You might be wondering why this module has
such a funny name, $env/static/private.
The static part indicates that these
values are known at build time.
And that means that they can
be statically replaced, and
this enables useful optimizations.
For example, if you have a feature flag
that is statically analyzed at build time,
then any code that is inside this block
will just be removed altogether if
the feature flag is not currently enabled.
So where possible, we recommend using
static environment variables, but
some cases, it might not be possible.
You might need to refer to environment
variables that are not known
when your app is built, but are only known
when your app is run, and for these,
we use dynamic environment variables.
So we have the same exercise as before,
but this time,
we're gonna use dynamic environment
variables instead of static ones.
First, we're gonna change the module
that we're importing from to dynamic.
And we're gonna import env instead of
PASSPHRASE because we don't know yet
what properties that env
object is going to have.
And then down here, we're gonna replace
PASSPHRASE with env.PASSPHRASE.
And now, as before, when we type in
the passphrase, we get into the website.
So so far, we've been dealing with
environment variables that are secret, and
they can only be accessed
by certain modules.
But you might have some environment
variables that are safe to
reveal to the user.
And these are distinguished from private
environment variables by having a PUBLIC_
prefix, which you can configure
in your svelte.config.
So in our .env file here, we're gonna
set some public environment variables.
We'll pick a color like steelblue for the
background and bisque for the foreground.
And then inside our component,
we can, in fact, import these and
replace the hard-coded variables
that we currently have.
So just delete all of that, and
import PUBLIC_THEME_BACKGROUND and
PUBLIC_THEME_FOREGROUND from
$env/static/public.
And now, when we reload this page,
it's pulling those values
directly from our env file.
So we can change that and
it will update the app.
And again, because we're
pulling from a static env file,
those properties will be replaced in
your code when the application is built.
Finally, of course, we can have dynamic
public environment variables too.
Same as before, we're just gonna
change the imports to env,
and grab that from
the dynamic module instead.
And then we'll prefix all of
these with env, same there.
And now,
the application renders same as before.
Any questions about environment variables?
All right, well, I have some good news,
we have finished the tutorial.
Congratulations, everyone,
thank you for bearing with me,
this has been a lot of
content to get through.
If you've made it the entire
way through this tutorial,
you can now consider yourself a Svelte and
SvelteKit expert.
You can start building apps on your own
machines by just typing npm create-svelte
on the command line, follow the prompts,
that will set you up
with a new application.
But this is not the end, Svelte and
SvelteKit will continue to evolve,
we're always adding new features.
And as a consequence,
this documentation will also evolve.
So I do encourage you to
check back periodically and
see if there's new material.
And if you wanna keep up with
developments in the Svelte world,
you can join our Discord server.
It's a very friendly
space at svelte.dev/chat.
And you can follow
Svelte Society on Twitter,
where you'll get a stream of updates
on everything Svelte-related.
We are very happy to welcome you
all to the Svelte community,
thank you for doing the tutorial with us.
And now, we're gonna move on to
the final part of this workshop,
where we're gonna take everything that
we've learned in the Svelte course and
the SvelteKit course and we're gonna
build a full stack application.